Okay, today we're going to take a look at a
problem student's having with his Mockito
test. Its tossing a null pointer and
doesn't see why. And he's gone ahead and
provided me his project up inside of
GitHub. I forked it to my repo and now
I'm going to go in and open it. So I have
IntelliJ up. So this is a directory here.
So he's looks like he's doing a Gradle
build. So I'm going to go ahead and open
this. And tell IntelliJ to import the
project and finish that. And take a
second for IntelliJ to start up. And he
was also on a branch. And he's on the error
branch so I need to check that out and
see if we can recreate this error for
him. It's going to take a second for
IntelliJ to scan everything. Now, he did
post the source code up on the forums.
I took a look. It didn't quite pop
out at me right away. A lot of times, it's
easier for me to get things inside of
IntelliJ. That way I have the full
project. It can be hard to troubleshoot
when you just get a snippet of code
there's too many variables.
Don't know what version you're on and it
could be something completely unrelated.
It could be something not on the screen.
So when I do run into something that I'm
not quite sure on, I do ask people to go
ahead. And just go ahead and put it
up in GitHub. Get me a link to it. That
way, I can bring it up like I am right
now and get the full picture rather than
just seeing a small piece of the picture.
So looks like IntelliJ is done. Let's go
ahead and run the test and see what we
get here.
And this is in the RecipeServiceTest.
I'm running into a couple problems here.
I'm going to pause this and resolve these
compile errors really quick. We ran off
pause and I'd see what's going on. We're
using Project Lombok. And I need to come
in and set up Project Lombok. Make sure
that we have the Java compiler,
Annotation processors, enable annotation processing.
That's the problem. It's
one thing with Project Lombok. You do
need to enable the annotation processing
so that it does pick everything up
properly. It looks like it did now. So
let's go ahead and try running this
again. And boom that's the error that he's
seeing. He's getting a null pointer error.
So it's get recipes all recipes. So this
is inside the class under
test. So he's testing this recipe service
implementation and the RecipeRepo.
I'm going to guess that it's not getting
set let's go ahead and prove that. I'm
going to set a breakpoint there. And let's
debug that recipeRepo, so that actually
is getting set. So that's interesting. So
recipes supposed to be HashSet, zero.
Stepping through that. We're into Mockito code, so I'm just going through the
debugger. Trying to see where you're
getting us to pop because I thought he
initially I thought that the recipeRepo
was not getting set. But apparently, it is
receipeRepos. Okay, let's take a look at
the recipe object. So that is a HashSet
so that's good. Let's take a closer look
at the test here. I want to go out and
continue this.
Okay I see what's going on here. So he's
doing a recipeRepo, findAll but what
we've done is we have not set up the
Mockito Mock action. So take a look at the
test here. So it initializes the Mocks
but we have not implemented the return
value on that. So default behavior of a
Mockito Mock, so the Mock is initiated.
But what's happening, might close some of
these out here, in the recipe service,
he's going to findAll method
is returning back a null and that is
failing. So let me pause this. I'm going to
refactor the code real quick. Okay, just
resumed it here and refactored the code
a little bit. So before we had all this
on one line and I've put the result
coming back from the RecipeRepo, so you
can see this a little easier. So now, I'm
going to move my debug point down here. And
let's rerun the test. Hopefully, actually
run around the debugger. The debug will
work a lot better that way. So now we're
at that break point. And now it's
easier to see that foundRecipes is infact null. So that's what's coming back
from the Mockito Mock there. So to findAll method is failing and it's a little
hidden there the way the code was
formatted.
I just reformat that, so you could see it
easier. I'm actually going to revert
that change. So this is the way it was
originally. We'll stop that and while
those pause there, I went in and added
under the lines that we need for my
Mockito. So I'm going to create a empty
ArrayList for the recipes, to give a
return value. So in here, you want to use
my Mockito to set up that Mock and so it
he was doing things right. So we had the
RecipeRepo marked as a Mock and we were
using the Mockito annotations to
initialize the Mock. So that will
set up the Mock but we weren't setting a
mock action on it. So now we're going to set
up a variable called recipeList. And
we're going to say when findAll is invoked
and then we're going to return that recipeList. And
just as a reminder, you'll need to
import the static import when. So we got
a couple other things that are no longer
being used here. But I'll clean. Actually
let's just clean it up right now. And go
in IntelliJ. Optimize imports boom. Now
let's go ahead and run this again. And we
can see that it is now passing. So that
that setup Mockito to return back a
value. So that null pointer was happening
because Mockito's default behavior, when
you don't tell it any type of action,
it's going to return back a null value. And
that method wasn't null safe. So it went
kaboom with the dreaded NPE. And
just to reiterate, if we get rid of that,
it's going to return back a null and
then go kaboom. So I am going to go ahead
commit this into GitHub and pass it back
to the student. So it can do a pull
request and see my exact changes here.
And I'll have this video up to share
with everybody else here in a little bit.